Snapshots from a Serial Class future 
=====================================

I personally believe that the acceptance of the BHPA/EHPU/PMA's proposal for Cat 1s to go Serial Class would be a disaster for competition paragliding. Imagine, if you will, a future in which CIVL decides that Cat 1s should be Serial Class... 

Now that Serial Class gliders can win high-profile Cat 1 events, many more manufacturers take an interest in competition, knowing that if their glider wins then that same model will become a best seller with the general public. For the World Championships coming in June, it is not just the regular competition wing manufacturers who want to be represented. No less than ten different manufacturers submit their new EN D gliders for certification in the months before the competition, each in four or five sizes. The certification houses are overwhelmed by the demand and are simply unable to keep up, and stress levels go through the roof as each manufacturer pushes to get his wing certified. 

Come the competition, not all sizes have been certified. Pilots on M-size gliders are generally OK, but some of the S- and L- gliders could not be certified in time. Small and large pilots alike are forced to fly the previous model. Few manufacturers find it economically viable to certify XS or XL gliders and so small and large pilots find themselves at best with a very limited choice of wings and at worst effectively excluded from competition. Two British National Champions and a talented female Japanese/French acro pilot are amongst those affected. 

CIVL, having proved themselves unable to enforce a simple load test or even check that pilots are flying with no more than 33kg of gear, now find themselves required to check every day that gliders have not been modified. This is a detailed and lengthy process. Even a simple check of line lengths, line thicknesses, risers and some quick measurements on the profile take 30 minutes per glider. With ten gliders to check each day, CIVL is forced to employ and train two skilled measurers who work late into the night after each task checking gliders before the provisional results can be published the following morning. Their time is paid for by increased entry fees. 

With Serial Class wings being heavily speed-limited to pass the accelerated tests, pilots quickly realise that they can push their gliders beyond pulley-to-pulley to gain a critical two or three critical kilometres per hour for the final glide. Final glides are won by the pilot who can push his speed bar the hardest, even though the wings are not particularly stable in this configuration. The certified wings are designed to re-open quickly to artificially-induced collapses rather than to remain open in active air and as a result there are regular and nasty blow-outs. 

On the third to last day of the World Championships, the leading pilot snags an upper line on the left hand side during launch, weakening it. Later in the race, following a small collapse, the line snaps during re-inflation. The pilot races into goal, finishing third on the day and securing his overall win. Except that, on landing, the broken line is noticed, and the pilot is disqualified for flying a glider with a non-certified line plan. The pilot scores zero for the day and loses his leading position, falling down to 30th in the rankings and shattering his hopes for a podium finish. Disillusioned, he returns home and does not compete again. 

Predictably, come the end of the final task, the team leader of the second place protests that the winning team's gliders are not within certification. The outcome of the World Championships depends on the outcome of the protest. The prize-giving ceremony is delayed by several hours as all wings from the top three teams and the top ten pilots are checked. By the time the ceremony finally starts, pilots are either bored, tired, drunk, or all three. 

By the following year, manufacturers design riser sets to make it easy to push beyond the pulley-to-pulley "maximum speed" used for certification, but the sack-of-potatoes constraints of certification mean that they cannot use collapse-resistant profiles. Final glide speeds increase, so do the frequency of high speed collapses. Scrutiny of the certification process is intense with manufacturers picking through each other's certification videos looking for flaws while at the same time pushing the limits of the certification in pursuit of performance themselves. 

With Cat 1 competitions going Serial Class, the pressure starts for Cat 2 competitions to go Serial Class too. This comes partly from CIVL, and partly from nations who want to use their National Championships to select their best Serial Class pilots for the Cat 1 events. Cat 2 events either bump their entry fees to pay for people to check wings, or are forced to find volunteers willing to be caught in the middle of arguments between pilots. The Cat 2s are plagued by the same endless protests that affect the Cat 1 scene. 

A special exemption is granted for World Cup events to be Cat 2 status and yet remain Open Class. Many top pilots vote with their feet, choosing to focus on World Cup events at the expense of their Nationals and Cat 2s. However, the difference between Serial Class and Open Class is large, and few pilots are willing to make the jump between classes. The World Cup is faced with a stark choice: either switch to Serial Class or fade into obscurity due to dwindling numbers as not enough pilots move to Open Class wings to compensate for the pilots leaving the scene. 

With the majority of competitions now Serial Class, glider development loses its testbed. Manufacturers can no longer test their latest prototypes against each other at every major competition, instead they must go through the slow and expensive certification process before the wing can be compared against others. With no more tuning and testing between tasks, the design iteration period slows from weeks to years. Glider development is done in isolation and progress slows to a crawl. Existing ideas are optimised and refined, but breakthroughs become a thing of the past.
