How to become World Champion in five easy steps
===============================================

So you want to be listed amongst the Greats like Pendry, Leden, Whittall, Cox, Goldsmith and Aebi? This short article explains how to get there in five steps, how the various competitions fit together and stack on top of each other to show you the path to winning the World Championships. Thanks to Dave "Snowy" Snowden who first explained this to me on a gentle hill in Wales many years ago.

**Step 1:** First steps. Events like the BCC (British Club Challenge) and the French B Access comps will show you how to make your first XC flights. The focus is on learning, you'll learn how to thermal up to cloudbase and then head off to find a second thermal. Everyone is there to help each other and the competition organisers will be particularly keen to help you spread you wings and explore beyond your local site. All you need is your LTF 1 / EN A wing and a borrowed GPS.

**Step 2:** Friendly competitions. The BPCup, the Ozone Chabre Open, the Rat Race and the French B league are the next step. As soon as you can thermal up to cloudbase you're ready to enter. The main objective is to maximise fun and learning but you'll find a few more serious pilots at the top end flying LTF 2-3 / EN D wings with cocoon harnesses even through most pilots will be on LTF 1-2 / 2 / EN B / EN C wings. These are real competitions, with the same structure and rules as the highest level competitions, so it's an ideal environment to improve your flying with your mates and at the same time get familiar with how competitions are run.

**Step 3:** National competitions. Once you've got a couple of decent (50km) XCs under your belt, maybe in one of the friendly comps, you're ready to progress to the next level. The pilot ability at the National event level varies from country to country and depends on how many pilots are flying in that country. The French have an A League and a National Championships, and you'll find the majority of French pilots flying competition wings at this level, whereas in the British Championships there is are large active Sports (LTF 2 / EN C) and Serial (LTF 2-3 / EN D) classes. These National Championships, typically lasting one week and being run under FAI Category 2 rules, are a fantastic events with friendly pilots at all levels. That said, the competition at the top is intense and getting in to the top ten at your National Championships is a stunning achievement and will result in pilots mentioning your name and the phrase "sky god" in the same sentence.

**Step 4:** the Paragliding World Cup. The World Cup circuit has the highest level of pilots on the Planet. You qualify individually, on merit alone. Realistically you need to be in the top ten in your country to be sure to be selected, but you can get in with a bit of luck with a lesser result. The Paragliding World Cup is full on. It's aggressive thermalling and block-to-block speedbar racing. Not only is virtually everyone on a competition wing, but a there will be many factory pilots on the latest prototypes. This is the leading edge of paraglider and pilot performance. Task wins at this level are reserved for the elite pilots.

**Step 5:** the FAI World Championships. The Paragliding World Cup is run by pilots for pilots, whereas the World Championships is the official event sanctioned by the World governing body on aviation. Places are not allocated to individuals, but rather to countries who then select their teams to represent them. If you're from a small country then you might get in having not achieved very much, but if you're from one of the larger paragliding nations then you'll need to have some top finishes in your National Championships and some excellent results at the Paragliding World Cup if you want to be selected. When you earn your team place you're sent to the Worlds. From here, winning the World Championships is up to you.
