Newbee take on this whole safety thing
======================================

As others have said: excellent post. Very insightful! One part stuck out for me: 

> Am I right in assuming that PG accidents fall into two categories: those up there in the Eiger North Face / Solo Antartic sailing end of the spectrum and those under the otherwise benign conditions where everybody else feels that they won't meet the same fate? 

Is it fair to assume that a reasonably sensible pilot with adequate skills, training, foresight and gear can find the middle ground between "not doing it" and just pushing it too far without really knowing it?

In a word: no. One's approach to risk for me ultimately defines how much he/she is likely to enjoy the sport. You characterise two categories: the first "North Face / Solo" one is "accidents only happen to people that do things that I will never do" and the second "benign conditions" one is "accidents happen to everybody, including things that people consider normal". For me, the truth lies between the two. It's like driving a car. Yes, if you push hard, beyond your current skills and experience you are more likely to have an accident. Once you're doing something really extreme then it becomes even more likely. But a lot of "normal" drivers get involved in car accidents too: sometimes it's a simple moment of neglect on their own part (e.g. misreading a traffic signal) sometimes it's beyond their own reasonable control (e.g. somebody else's misreading of a traffic signal). Simply by choosing to get in your car you accept a base level of risk. You can take more risk if you want by changing your driving style but you can never go below a certain base level. 

The trouble is, of course, that the greater the risk the greater the reward. Soaring is fun. But doing a few wingovers in the smooth ridge lift is even more fun. Each pilot finds his own comfort level: ask any pilot and he/she will tell you "I'm actually quite risk-averse, I'm careful in what I choose to do, I don't like being scared". Of course, for some "scared" is ridge soaring on a slightly windy day and for others "scared" is pushing 75% bar on a high-end comp wing or learning how to tumble. Every pilot flies on the edge between "too boring" and "too scary", and the location of this edge is entirely personal. 

What this means is that you will push your own flying until you get scared. Any less and you'll be bored. Any more and you'll quit the sport. You just have to make sure that your skills match your ambitions. Generally this means progressing fast enough to maintain your interest but slow enough to mean that you're never operating too far outside your abilities. This is why people who have a background in other "adventure" sports do so well: they already subconsciously understand this and are better able to understand their own desires and abilities. They know where their personal limits lie. 

Paragliding is a particularly extreme bipolar bitch. You can make a huge error, flying into rotor or mishandling a collapse, end up spinning out of control for hundreds of meters and yet recover with a few metres to spare and land shaken but unharmed. At other times a small collapse close to the ground can put you in the trees and in the hospital. It's not like rock climbing where small errors are punished with small injuries and you get ample warning of what would happen if you make a big error. Paragliding is binary: you end up in hospital or you walk away unharmed. There is little middle ground. 

All that I've written implies that paragliding is a dangerous sport, and it is. But it is also a rich sport that offers rewards on many levels that make it worthwhile. Whether you regard it as sailing in three dimensions, a game of aerial chess, a wonderous way of exploring nature and the mountains, or simply an expression of pure magical freedom the moment your feet leave the ground, it is a sport which is utterly worthwhile. 
