Why the World Championships thread was locked
=============================================

Now is not the time to discuss this, but I need to write this while it is fresh in my mind. Facing the tragedgy in Piedrahita today, this all seems so trivial but it is in the darkest times that our actions must be the most clear. The Forum prides itself in its independence and freedom, but today I restricted discussion on a subject. This was not a decision that I took lightly and, although the tragedy of the events makes it clear that this restriction was the right action today, this should not set an automatic precedent for such restrictions in the future. By writing this post, I hope to explain why I, a Moderator, felt it right to prevent you, the Forum Members, from posting.

We were all following the live tracking. Even though the feed was delayed by a few minutes, it was clear that Ronny Helgesen had descended too fast just a short distance from goal. Several people posted to the World Champs thread, asking what had happened. Others posted with suggestions of accidents that may or may not have been related to Ronny's live track. At this point I received an email from the World Champs organisation asking me to stop discussion on the forum and call them if needed. I was cynical - how could discussing stuff on an internet forum be a problem? - so I called. From the phone call, although I did not ask for details, it was clear that they were dealing with something serious.

This was snap decision time: I am being asked to effectively censor discussion about something that I know nothing about. Of course I was curious, but what was absolutely 100% clear to me is that the organisation were in the thick of dealing with the problem on the ground and that we, over the internet, were not in a position to help. In the case of the search for Xavier Murillo it is utterly clear that the Forum makes a direct and real difference: we can draw upon the immense solidarity and generosity of paraglider pilots across the World to both diffuse and centralise information quickly and pool our resources to help one of our own.

In Piedrahita, however, it was clear that everybody who was in a position to make a positive difference was already on the scene and doing their best. Discussion on the forum at this stage would not help. If posts were based on speculation then it could easily worry people unnecessarily (indeed, we seemed to think that it was Ronny who had had the accident, which in fact was not at all the case). If forum members sought to gather information (as, indeed, the Forum is fantastic at doing: no other paragliding site can boast having several thousand pilots reporting and contributing on all issues from all over the World), if we sought to gather information then this would be of arguable help. I put myself in the position of a pilot on the ground in Piedrahita, trying to coordinate a rescue, but being hampered by frequent calls from concerned friends, eager to hear what had happened. I put myself in the position of a curious but well-intentioned forum member, wanting to know the details. I put myself in the position of a friend or relative, following the event through the Forum, and reading speculation as to what might have occured. On the ground, the organisation were already being overwhelmed by enquiries from concerned, but distant, pilots.

When an accident occurs it is clear what to do: if you can help, then you do so. If you cannot help then you step back and get out of the way. In this case, I took the decsision that the best way for the Forum to help would be would step back and get out of the way. It was not an easy decision. By stopping all information flow, are you in fact causing more concerned phone calls to the people on the ground? I decided that, on balance, in the early stages of a crisis there is normally more inaccurate information than good and so I locked the thread. It was not an easy decision, and not something that I would have done without the express request of the organisation, many of whom I know personally and trust. They would not make such a request without good reason.

After the locking of the thread, I spoke to the organisation several times over the phone. I was keen to unlock, but ultimately when they said "we can't really deal with [the consequences] of that now" I took it on trust and kept the thead locked. I updated the thread to try to keep you, the Forum Members, informed but trying to do so in a way that would not trigger complaints or undue alarm. The organisation did not tell me what had happened, nor did I ask. Satisfying my own curiosity would benefit nobody but me.

This situtation could clearly not go on too long. However much I was hoping that people would sit back for a short time and wait for good, accurate information, it was clear that tension would be building behind the scenes. The organisation promised an offical statement that would supply this information and allow discussion to continue, and indeed they did this.

When the official statement arrived by email it was a huge shock. I had had no idea that such a double tragedy had happened. As agreed with the organisation, I posted a message containing the statement and a short sentence saying that the thread was now unlocked. I wasn't capabale of much more. I checked photos of Eitel von Muhlenbrock and Francisco Vargas on the CIVL WPRS website. Eitel was looking contemplative. Francisco was flying tandem over incredible scenery with an insanely happy child on the front. These fellow pilots who I had never met were suddenly very real and very gone. With the continued absence of Xavier Murillo, today, many of us will be asking ourselves whether what we love is really worth it.

I do realise that, by restricting your discussion here on the forum I have put your trust in the forum's independence and freedom in jeopardy. I hope that, by writing this, I can convey the tragic circumstances leading up to it. In times of stress it is all to easy to over-react, but we must ensure that are reactions are not tainted by the anger, fear and sadness we feel but instead measured and in proportion. I hope to never have to do the same again.

Fly safe, my friends.
